README.md, before:

# Plummet

Plummet allows running SQL for transforming data using [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org). It uses a simple Makefile like pattern where there are targets with SQL to run that can be dependent on other targets.

## Why do this?

There are a lot of very [complex](https://docs.dagster.io/getting-started/quickstart#understanding-the-code) [pipeline](https://docs.prefect.io/latest/tutorial/flows/#run-your-first-flow) [descriptions](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/index.html#workflows-as-code) out there for doing ETLs. The goal is to allow a single file to define a simple pipeline that doesn't need any prior knowledge of a complex framework.

## Why DuckDB?

DuckDB has some nice features that make it well suited for this sort of process.

1. It has support for writing output to files in different [formats](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/statements/copy#format-specific-options).
1. It has support for connecting to a large number of databases and importing from files.
1. It is optimized for fast analytic queries with zero dependencies and fits well into larger data systems.

## How does it work?

The pipeline is configured with a `plummet.yml`. Here is example.

```yml
targets:
  setup_postgres:
    sql: |
      INSTALL POSTGRES;
      LOAD POSTGRES;
  get_events:
    config:
      PG_DBURI: "postgres://timescaledb:password@localhost/userup_userservice"
    sql: "ATTACH '{{ .PG_DBURI }}' as db (TYPE postgres, READ_ONLY);"
    deps: ["setup_postgres"]
  save_events:
    output: "events.parquet"
    sql: "COPY db.events TO 'events.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET);"
    deps: ["get_events"]
```

The `targets` defines the different targets you can run. Each target can have a few different options.

- `sql` is the SQL code you want to run. DuckDB exposes a lot of powerful capabilities, with the simple example above showing how to grab data from a Postgres DB and write a Parquet file.
- `deps` is a list of targets that are required before this target can be run.
- `output` allows defining an output for use later.
- `config` allows you to set variables that can be used in the SQL.

## Why "plummet"?

Pipeline are "plumbing", so "plummet" sounds like "plumb it".

Commit message:

Quick update about the output file
We don't use the output file as a dependency, but I think we could
potentially. I think the more important thing may be avoiding running
some part of the job. This could be a built-in concept, but a better
tactic might simply be to allow dyanmic parameters to be passed in.

For example, if your job is meant to pull in data every day, you need
to pass in some concept of "now" or "today" to the SQL. Some functions
that make dealing with time or storing output from other queries would
likely work.

The time aspect is reasonably understood, but if someone is using
autoincrementing ID fields and they want to get everything larger than
some ID, we could allow storing a "last_id". The SQL job could have a
simple scratch table as well with a set schema that allows someone to
easily do:

```
INSERT INTO target_metadata (key, value)
VALUES ('last_id', (SELECT max(id) FROM some_table));
```

You could then join with the target_metedata table in your SQL or
call a function that would query under the hood to add some
convenience.

README.md, after:

# Plummet

Plummet allows running SQL for transforming data using [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org). It uses a simple Makefile like pattern where there are targets with SQL to run that can be dependent on other targets.

## Why do this?

There are a lot of very [complex](https://docs.dagster.io/getting-started/quickstart#understanding-the-code) [pipeline](https://docs.prefect.io/latest/tutorial/flows/#run-your-first-flow) [descriptions](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/index.html#workflows-as-code) out there for doing ETLs. The goal is to allow a single file to define a simple pipeline that doesn't need any prior knowledge of a complex framework.

## Why DuckDB?

DuckDB has some nice features that make it well suited for this sort of process.

1. It has support for writing output to files in different [formats](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/statements/copy#format-specific-options).
1. It has support for connecting to a large number of databases and importing from files.
1. It is optimized for fast analytic queries with zero dependencies and fits well into larger data systems.

## How does it work?

The pipeline is configured with a `plummet.yml`. Here is example.

```yml
targets:
  setup_postgres:
    sql: |
      INSTALL POSTGRES;
      LOAD POSTGRES;
  get_events:
    config:
      PG_DBURI: "postgres://timescaledb:password@localhost/userup_userservice"
    sql: "ATTACH '{{ .PG_DBURI }}' as db (TYPE postgres, READ_ONLY);"
    deps: ["setup_postgres"]
  save_events:
    output: "events.parquet"
    sql: "COPY db.events TO 'events.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET);"
    deps: ["get_events"]
```

The `targets` defines the different targets you can run. Each target can have a few different options.

- `sql` is the SQL code you want to run. DuckDB exposes a lot of powerful capabilities, with the simple example above showing how to grab data from a Postgres DB and write a Parquet file.
- `deps` is a list of targets that are required before this target can be run.
- `output` allows defining an output for later use. This isn't leveraged at the moment.
- `config` allows you to set variables that can be used in the SQL.

## Why "plummet"?

Pipeline are "plumbing", so "plummet" sounds like "plumb it".
